# Theory of the Complex Adaptive System
A complex adaptive system (CAS) is defined as one that is capable of adapting to its external environment and its internal state so that it survives despite the circumstances that befall it. Studies of CAS are based on the holistic premise that there is more to a holistic system than the sum of its components and linkages (Simon, 1996). CAS shows properties that are truly emergent, irreducible to explanations that take into account only those properties of its lower level components. From a review of CAS literature (Anderson, 1999; Arthur, Defillipp, & Lindsay, 2001; Chiva-Gomez, 2004; Cilliers, 1998, 2000; Eoyang, 1996; McKelvey, 1999, 2001; Rhodes & MacKechnie, 2003; Simon, 1996;Tan,Wen, & Awad, 2005), the major principles of CAS can be summarized as follows:

1. **Principle of open systems**. A CAS is an open system. It interacts with its environment. It exchanges energy or information with its environment and operates at conditions far from equilibrium.  

2. **Principle of interactions and relationships**. Constituent elements of a CAS interact dynamically and exchange energy or information with each other. Even if only specific elements interact with a few others, effects of these interactions are propagated throughout the CAS.The behavior of such a system is determined greatly by the nature of these interactions, and not simply by what is contained within these elements. 

3. **Principle of transformative feedback loops**. Interactions across a CAS’s boundary result in many direct and indirect transforming feedback loops among the components of the system. Change in one part of the system is transmitted via its boundaries to other parts of the system, causing recipients of feedback information to change or react in some fashion. These secondary changes (reactions) are transmitted back to the originator, causing the originator to change again, and so on. Within an organizational context, feedback loops have the potential to spur continuous improvement and provide a shared sense of community involvement.

4. **Principle of emergent behavior**. Because interactions among different entities of a CAS are rich, dynamic, nonlinear, and fed back, the behavior of the CAS as a whole cannot be predicted simply from an inspection of its components. To understand the implications of these interactions and make predictions about a CAS’s behavior, the notion of “emergence” and “emergent behavior” is needed. Unpredictable and novel ideas may emerge (which may or may not be desirable) as a result of these interactions, but by definition they are not an indication of malfunction. These emerging ideas should not be censored simply because they were unanticipated.

5. **Principle of distributed control**. A CAS cannot thrive when there is too much central control.This certainly does not imply that there should be no control; rather, control should be distributed throughout the system. However, one should not go overboard with notions of self-organization and distributed control.  

6. **Principle of shallow structure**. A CAS works best with shallow structure. This should be interpreted to suggest that a CAS should have some structure, but only the minimal amount of structure necessary for it to effectively achieve its objectives.  

7. **Principle of growth and evolution**. In a CAS, survival is enhanced through continuous growth and evolution occurring in minuscule increments as the system responds to emerging internal and external environmental changes. This principle fosters adaptation by allowing the CAS to pay immediate attention to the needs of its immediate surroundings. In doing so, the CAS reorients itself incrementally to more distant/remote environmental conditions. Adaptation thus occurs in minuscule incremental steps.